foreign
yeah let's start let's get started I'm
Dan I was CTO at Heap for the last nine
years
um I'll be sharing some lessons learned
while building that company today uh and
also uh you can think of these as advice
I wish I could give my the 2013 version
of myself when we started building the
company
um if you haven't used Heap yet it's a
product analytics platform it also
recently became additionally a session
replay platform come talk to me after if
you want to talk about it it's not
really what this Talk's about
so here are some things I wish I knew in
2013 when we were building this
the first conversation I wish I could
have with the younger version of myself
it's actually really simple just about
uh what your job as CTO is and more
generally what your job is as a leader
of a company
um specifically your job is to make the
company win so you might imagine that uh
in some fundamental sense the cto's job
is technical or it involves a certain
part of the technology or any kind of
other way you might attach yourself to
the role but your actual job as a leader
is to make the company win and the
reason that's an important distinction
is that what the company needs from you
in order to win changes constantly like
in my case every 12 maybe 18 months uh
what the company needed me to be doing
if we were going to be successful
changed totally so that means you need
to get used to constantly adapting
letting go of the thing that you just
feel like you kind of got your head
around and just kind of got good at
because you need to do a different thing
now you need to hire someone else to do
that or or hand it to someone else on
the team you need to be doing something
new so you have to get used to letting
go that's often one of the hard parts of
adapting as your job changes but that
change is going to be constant I I will
say maybe the only piece that didn't
change is that at some point your job
becomes substantially about recruiting
and that never really goes away so that
was a real constant for nine years but
other than that every year or so uh the
job would change and it's really on you
as a leader to figure out what you need
to be doing it's it other people can
give you input but it's really for you
to figure out what your job should be
and what you need to do to to make the
company win
so
um I I mentioned that one of the hard
Parts is letting go of something you
just got good ahead
um I will share it from a from on a
personal level
um uh some advice that I had that I've
seen help a lot of people is uh to keep
your identity like your personal
identity small and flexible and agile
um and the reason I say that is uh if
you attach your identity to any specific
aspect of your job or you get you know
self-esteem from you know writing code
well or writing a certain kind of code
well or being an expert in a certain
thing or any kind of particular aspect
of your role if you attach that to your
self-esteem and your identity it'll be
really hard to let go of it because it
will become personal and uh you know you
you can't swing to the next Monkey Bar
unless you let go of the last Monkey Bar
so that will make it hard I'll also add
that a good coach can help you with this
my coach helped me with it a lot
um but if you if you can recognize this
happening uh you know psychologically in
yourself or in peers
um it can help a lot
to let go and then do the next thing
that's what the company actually needs
so your job is to make the company win
try to keep your identity small and
adapt because it'll what you need to do
to make the company will be changing
constantly
second
um a second conversation I wish I could
have with a younger version of myself is
um about strategy and what strategy
means and what good strategy looks like
uh strategy uh for a SAS company I argue
should look kind of obvious specifically
if you have a clear understanding of the
business and the market and what
customers are trying to do the right
strategy should seem kind of obvious and
simple
um and it to be even a little more
provocative about it SAS is Checkers not
chess you shouldn't be thinking of
yourself as like a grand master of SAS
you should be thinking of this as like a
kind of simple game with kind of simple
rules and it's more a question of
executing them well and understanding
the game board or if you want to stretch
the analogy a little bit uh it's like a
game of checkers where if you don't have
good context about your company you
won't see the whole board and you might
make mistakes but once you see the board
it's the game of checkers it's not a
game of chess
um so it should look kind of obvious
um you know when I was younger I thought
strategy meant really rigorous thinking
about first principles fundamentals and
then you know figuring out what the
second order consequences of things were
and gaming things out in war gaming you
know if we do X and a competitor does y
and then we do Z to counter and another
company comes in and does w like what
will that mean for the market
um that stuff can be interesting to
Think Through It can occasionally be
valuable if one of those scenarios does
come to pass it'll be useful to have
thought through it beforehand but I
would argue it's not a sound foundation
for thinking through your strategy you
don't know what competitors are going to
do they're not going to operate exactly
the way you think they are
um and even if you even if you don't get
sunk by some you know detailed unknown
unknown and you know any Nuance that
you're missing about your business or
what your customers are trying to do
could make your reasoning wrong even if
you don't get sunk by one of those
things you're missing uh you might still
get the timing wrong like you can reason
from first principles about what people
should want to buy or should be trying
to do and you may just be early by five
years and build something that no one
wants yet and you're still posed so
um don't think of this as a game of uh
as a you know a complex reasoning
process check a chess type thing
um try to keep it simple this is
particularly a trap I I I've observed
for people like me who come from an
engineering background engineering
teaches you to find really clever
solutions that get around a whole bunch
of constraints at once cleverness is
actually not your friend when it comes
to strategy because cleverness will make
your strategy brittle you want it to be
kind of simple and unclever
um and if you want if I'm being even a
little bit more honest a lot of
engineering culture is about
um showing people how smart and clever
you are by your solution to a problem
and that's really not your friend if you
let that mode of thinking get into how
you do strategy because the goal isn't
to appear smart it's to have something
that will work as a business
so uh you know be careful clever is
actually kind of a smell you can attach
yourself to large Tailwinds or important
Trends but by and large I would try to
keep it simple play a game of checkers
uh uh focus on the context part so
um I used to worry that we would make a
strategic mistake because we didn't
foresee some second order consequence of
the way our Market was evolving or
something like that never happened in
nine years of working at the company
um we did make mistakes because we got
the context wrong because there was some
Nuance about what customers were
actually trying to do and we didn't
understand it right and then we built
something that didn't quite solve their
problem it's really easy to mistakes to
make mistakes that way so um I would
focus on getting the context right
that's the hard part of strategy
remember I said strategy strategy should
seem obvious
given a clear understanding of the
business and the market and what your
customers are trying to do that part's
the hard part is understanding that
um uh so for example
um you know if you're on a leadership
team and you do some kind of exec
offsite and you come back from the exec
off site with a big exciting brand new
strategy about what you're going to do
to solve all the problems in the company
you should be super suspicious that that
strategy is right because you designed
it in in almost a context vacuum like
you have eight to ten people on your
leadership team the other 90 of your
company wasn't in the room none of your
customers were in the room you're like
you've designed it in a low context
environment like the hard part isn't
standing around a whiteboard and being
smart the hard part is having the
context so an alternative I would argue
is a much better way to generate context
or to generate to generate strategy is
uh via waves of intensive customer
feedback where you're testing specific
hypotheses that will flush out the gaps
in your context or the gaps in your
thinking uh that's like a way to
optimize around what is the actual hard
part of the problem which is the context
so focus on that the strategy will be
obvious once you do that once you if you
get that right
another strategic idea I I wish I
understood nine years ago is that
software is fractal and what I mean by
that is when you look at software you
see features and if you zoom in on a
feature you'll see sub features and if
you zoom in on one of those sub features
they see Sub sub features and it's kind
of infinitely nuanced and Rich all the
way down and the reason for that is that
software
um mirrors or encodes uh human needs and
business process needs and those are
just infinitely nuanced and complex and
the software goes in complexity to uh to
to match the needs of what you're trying
to do so um this is important for a
couple reasons first of all any feature
that you launch that's successful will
generate a whole pile of sub features
and additional investment that seem kind
of obvious in retrospect but you might
not have foreseen up front for example
um in 2015 we launched a feature that
let customers get their Heap data set in
their data warehouse it was great
customers loved it killer feature you
can do a lot of useful stuff with that
and then immediately once we launch that
we found that we needed to support
additional warehouses let people
customize the sync schedule actually
maybe you only want to sync some events
and not others maybe you want to sync
some metadata that we didn't think of
maybe you want to customize which
properties go through like it's 2022
we're still investing in that stuff
because we keep finding new ways to
better meet the needs it's seven years
later so uh these these things are
essentially bottomless so you should
expect like you're if you're thinking of
your roadmap as we're going to do X and
then we're going to do y uh you're
you're probably missing something
because if you if x works you'll
probably want to do more X so it might
be better to think in terms of funding
areas rather than you know accomplishing
specific features because you you
discover this as you go
and then the second consequence is that
you should expect
um competitor functionality to have more
than might meet the eye so if a
competitor has an important feature and
you want to replicate it you might not
recognize all the sub features and Sub
sub features because you haven't watched
the first thing yet and you just don't
have the resolution on it so it's one
thing if you're thinking a competitor
does X but most of the effort went into
this piece of it and we have reason to
believe that that piece of it is useless
or no one cares about it and we only
need the simple part that's one thing
but if you're just thinking oh this
competitor has this thing we could bang
that out on a weekend we probably could
bang out a first version of it in a
weekend but you you might be wrong about
you might be missing whole pieces of
what the actual what the feature really
does
so uh your strategy should reflect the
fact that features are fractal software
is fractal
um and one more note on this is that for
most SAS companies this is where the
technical moat comes from your technical
mode is not usually some unique specific
piece of technology it's uh for most SAS
and just an accumulation of
um ever more nuanced enriched and
detailed handlings of all it's this
accumulation of feature weight and and
uh you know third level investments in
these features that's what your moat
comes from
third conversation I wish I could have
with my younger self is about tasting
the soup the idea of soup tasting is
that you can't fully understand
something unless you engage with it in
some kind of direct way or you engage
with specific anecdotes in a direct way
for example let's say you want to know
if you are providing good support to
your customers there are metrics for
this you can look at you know NPS and
csat and response time and there are
standard metrics for this there are
tools that measure those things they are
benchmarkable that will give you some
understanding of what is happening at
scale I would argue that is inherently
incomplete and if you really want to
know if you're providing good support
you should also look at some example
support interactions read some tickets
look at some email back and forth make
some kind of intuitive subjective
assessment of what you know is this good
is this would I appreciate this as a
customer were there ways to help them
that we may be missed here or something
like that if you want to be really
sneaky about it you can you know make a
fake email and like file is important
you can actually you know truly taste
the soup and experience what someone
experiences with your support team but
um this turns out to be important
particularly because as you scale
uh you'll get a lot of advice about how
uh you know the business is adapting and
you need to scale yourself and figure
out processes and systems that scale and
you can't run the company at 20 million
AR the way you did it two million ARR
and like that advice is generally
correct that's all true but what it
usually means is creating processes and
systems and layers that create
indirection and distance between you and
the product you and customers you and
the you know the the object level things
in your business so if you don't figure
out some kind of way to
um you know stay in touch with that
stuff and continuously uh invest in in
deep rich context you won't have the
right visceral understanding of what's
going on you won't recognize you won't
have good strategic thoughts if you
don't if you don't make that kind of
context investment so that's that's the
idea of tasting the soup another way to
think about it is you can't understand
what's going on in a sports game by
looking at the scoreboard only you have
to actually you know watch the game and
look at the details
um so uh you know figure out ways to
continue using the product figure out um
ways to continue talking to users
Paul Graham has a great article or a
great essay if you haven't read it I
would definitely check it out called do
things that don't scale I would add you
need to keep doing things that don't
scale in addition to doing all the
things that do scale
we we got so into this we made it a
company value it ended up being
transformative
um uh you know a particular instance
that that stuck out to me actually my
first project as an advisor for the
company after I left the day-to-day in
March was to run a product boot camp and
what that meant is the engineering lead
the product lead the design lead the CEO
of the company and the chief customer
officer cleared their calendars for a
full week and we spent a whole week in
focused ways using the product like
doing real customer workflows trying to
unders trying to accomplish things
customers try to accomplish in the
product getting our hands really dirty
actually using it
and by the end of the second day we were
slapping our foreheads and saying we
should have done this thing a year ago
because it's such a it's such a helpful
way to enrich your understanding and
build a more complete uh you know
visceral understanding of what the
product is good at what it's bad at what
the opportunities are to make it better
all that stuff so it doesn't mean you're
making your exec team into your you know
you are ux architecture designers or
something like that like we had a fan we
have a fantastic team that
um you know uh you know comes to a lot
of the same conclusions independently
either the right people to solve these
problems but to the degree that you as a
leader need to understand what's going
on with your product and your business
this is an important way to enrich
enrich the context you have
um a fourth conversation I wish I could
have with a younger version of myself is
about how energy is more important than
time
and I'll actually tell you a short story
um a couple of years ago
um I I had a co-worker uh who uh with
whom I had a you know probably more
friction than anyone else I ever worked
with
and uh you know it took us a really long
time to work out a uh a functional way
of collaborating useful usually with
each other we did eventually get there
but um a couple months in he told me
something that really stuck with me
which was and this was like in the midst
of us butting heads he told me Dan
you're pretty much always right
and you're so difficult sometimes that
it's not even worth it
you're pretty much always right and
you're so difficult sometimes it's not
even worth it
um I mean it really made me think is
what a weird thing to hear and actually
to uh to to really make it hit home he
um he told me this right before I went
on a vacation so I had like 10 days to
really stew on like what does that mean
you're pretty much always right but I
didn't like the butt
um or and whatever so uh um you know I
thought about it and he was right in his
wisdom he was totally totally correct
and the reason he was right is
um uh most people end their day when
they run out of energy not when they run
out of time I don't know I I am not this
person I don't know anyone who um you
know productively gets stuff done right
up until the moment where they then
close the laptop and close their eyes
and goes Nobody works that way and if
you do tell me how what coffee you're
like that no one I don't know anyone who
works that way
um what you act what most people
actually do is
um work up until they hit some point
where they realize they're not useful
anymore or they feel like they've kind
of got enough done today out of energy
they're tired they don't really want to
do stuff anymore and they'll pay get up
again tomorrow that's that's like how
you make a marathon out of building SAS
or how you make it work as a marathon
um so uh people run out of energy they
don't run out of time
that's important because uh most
discourse or there's a lot of discourse
about how to about you know time
efficiency and time management not
wasting people's time but I would argue
you should care given that the real
bottleneck is energy you should care
just as much if not more about not
wasting People's Energy
um because that's the thing that they
run out of at the end at the end of the
day so um you need to understand the
energetic costs of things for example
let's say there's some annoying chore
that people on your team need to do it
might only take like 15 minutes a week
but if it's really really annoying it's
actually more expensive than it's 15
minutes because it taxes people at
people's energy or
um you know if there's a really
combative person on the team uh you know
the cost of that person isn't the time
that goes that your teammates spend
arguing with them it's it's the fact
that they're exhausted after and they
don't want to do like that person makes
everyone around them like finish their
day earlier that's that's that's really
where the cost of that comes from
um and it's also important to think
about because as a leader
um unfortunately you can be uniquely
exhausting because uh you know for ways
that for for all kinds of reasons that
you might not realize
um uh and in ways you might not realize
interacting with you for a lot of people
will be automatically stressful which
means that uh you know and and magnified
so uh for example you might be in some
context where you don't understand why
we think something is going to work and
you're trying to understand why we think
this thing will work and if you're not
careful someone will perceive that as
you know being grilled or like an
interrogate especially if it's in front
of a broader audience like you you may
have an enormous energetic cost impact
on them that you don't realize so you
need to be really really careful about
that even if you perceive yourself to be
like innocuous or like a shy nerd which
is how I thought about myself which is
another good example of how you need to
keep your identity flexible because
these things change
um the flip side is that as a leader you
can also be uniquely energizing if you
can find ways to do it authentically
what I mean is if you can Channel some
kind of authentic excitement or
enthusiasm about what we're doing it can
be really infectious and positive and
you can create almost free energy that
means more stuff getting done and stuff
going faster that means for example if
you're in the midst of a slog you can
remind people why what we're doing is so
cool or why but something is so valuable
and important to the business or
um or something like that another
another great one is uh you can you can
praise people publicly and it will have
unique weight coming from you and you
can do that all the time and if it's
authentic and it'll it'll mean a lot to
them and you know you'd be shocked that
that means a lot to almost everyone even
people that you don't imagine that it
would mean a lot to so your job is not
to be a cheerleader necessarily and you
shouldn't do these things
inauthentically because like it'll come
off with people people are smart they'll
know but um but uh you know just just
understand the ways that you uh create
energy and can also kill energy or be
exhausting because that's the actual
bottleneck in people getting stuff done
the fifth conversation I wish I could
have with a younger version of myself is
about
um about experience and I didn't really
uh you know when we were building this
business in the early days I thought
okay we want people who are smart and
they get a lot done and they're
reasonable and they're good to
collaborate with they're good
collaborative Partners maybe they're
empathetic like those things seem
fundamentally important certainly we
don't want people who are missing one of
those qualities
um uh and I didn't really understand why
experience was such a thing that people
uh you know talk about or obsess over
um I I sort of had this idea that you
know the more experience you have the
more knowledge you accrue and that's
sort of right but there's actually
specific things that experienced people
can do that you can't that are really
hard to replicate if you don't have
experience
um and I wish I understood them
the first is
experience building companies gives you
pattern recognition what I mean is uh if
you've seen stuff before you will
recognize it more quickly the next time
you see it because it will remind you of
previous things that you saw and in a
kind of fundamental sense it's really
hard to do that if you're inexperienced
because you just don't have the data set
you can't map it to stuff that you
haven't seen so
um so experience gives you the ability
to to recognize patterns if you're
inexperienced you might want to
complement yourself with uh mentors who
can augment your pattern recognition or
or working with peers or something like
that but um experience makes this easy
in a way that is hard without experience
a particular form of pattern recognition
that I think is really important is
knowing what good looks like for some
domain or some attribute of your company
and the reason is uh if you if you don't
have a good um you know historical data
set of scenarios that you've seen in
different companies you can make
relative assessments but it's hard to
make absolute assessments for example
um let's say your your design team and
your engineering team are not
collaborating well they're butting ahead
something like that you can recognize
the problem you can get your leaders in
a room and the relevant stakeholders and
hammer out a new process and a new way
design and Engineering are going to work
together
um uh you can roll that thing out and if
you're you know you can make an
assessment about whether you've improved
the situation like if you're smart and
you listen well and you're
intellectually honest you can assess is
this better is this not better is this a
lot better that's a relative assessment
uh but you it's hard to know on an
absolute scale if it could be way better
because you just haven't seen what good
looks like necessarily so another way to
think about is you you can you can you
you can know something's improved but
you don't know did it go from C minus to
C plus or C minus to V plus or C minus
to a if you haven't seen a then it's
really hard to know if you're there yet
so um this is something that experienced
people can do really effectively and a
consequence of this is
um you should look for leaders who have
seen seen good and ideally helped create
good in the ways in which your company
needs to be really good so you figure
out what your company needs to do well
and then if you don't have anyone there
who has seen doing that thing really
well you might be in trouble because how
will you know if you're doing it so
pattern recognition the first thing that
um uh you know experience it's a super
power of experience
the second thing experienced people can
do or an advantage an advantage of
experience is that you accumulate
playbooks A playbook is
um sort of an implicit or explicit uh
weight assault to recognize and solve a
problem and uh kind of obviously if you
solve the problem before you'll probably
be a lot faster solving it the next time
um so uh this is the reason this is so
important uh I would say this becomes
really important in the growth stage uh
when you hit
um when the company is really early on
you you and your your team can figure
stuff out and uh you know use your wits
to solve everything from first
principles and experiments but when you
hit growth stage and the company is
doubling year on year
you don't have time to to figure out
everything like the problems are coming
so fast and from so many different
directions that
um it's it's hard to stay ahead of the
curve of what the company needs if you
don't if you haven't or people on your
team haven't accumulated some kind of
playbooks for how to solve them uh like
you don't have
um you know a quarter to recognize a
problem a quarter to try to solve it and
fail and then a third quarter to try to
solve it again a new way and succeed you
need to be recognizing and resolving
these things you know intra quarter
because the company is exploding and and
growing so quickly and you need to like
that this is where playbooks are so
important
um obviously assuming to think
critically like you can't just Trot out
the same slides as last time and assume
every exact con like you need to
understand contextually what is relevant
and and you know think critically and
work hard playbooks don't do the job for
you but um but they help and that you
can do stuff faster
and then a third
um superpower of experience is that
experience tends to make people credible
um that means that uh if you if you hire
an experienced leader either as a
manager or an individual contributor
they should level up the the caliber of
talent that you're able to attract
around them because they're more
credible they have a track record people
want to work people should want to work
with them they should be able to
credibly sell that what we're doing is
important or that they will help grow
people's careers or all that stuff so
experience
um makes people credible and in fact I
would go so far to say if you hire a
leader and you don't perceive a change
in the caliber of talent in their
organization six months later you you
there's a problem like you may have
hired the wrong leader or you should
that's a real red flag because it's so
core to to
um to Leading organizations well and
it's so it's such an important um part
of what you get out of experience
so um it means you can attract better
people it also means
um you you The credibility has an
internal aspect uh you it should make it
easier to
um to launch initiatives or create new
processes or align on stuff if you are
more credible because you have done it
before and the reason is that a lot of
processes kind of work uh uh or the
degree which they work depends on how
much people believe that they will work
and then buy into them uh so it often
means that a more credible person can
make something work that a less credible
person wouldn't be able to make work
even if they had the same ideas
so uh unfortunately credibility is is
just part of the value of experience and
and uh is something that that um you
don't just get from you know the
fundamentals of being intelligent and
critical and empathetic and all that
stuff
so
um pattern recognition playbooks
credibility those are the things that
you that you get with experience uh you
know you still need to be or a person
you hire still needs to be smart low ego
they still need to be a soup taster they
still need to be empathetic all those
things
um so I'm not saying you know make hires
based on resume like don't get fooled by
a resume but uh these are things that
kind of uniquely come from experience
so this is the most most what I wanted
to share with you today uh uh or advice
for my younger self understand what your
job is and understand that it will
require constant adaptation get good at
adapting to it uh strategy should be
obvious stop trying to play chess it's a
game of checkers
um uh you know figure out ways to taste
soup make a religion out of tasting the
soup be suspicious people who don't
taste the soup it should be an important
part of how you operate understand that
people's energy is more important than
their time it's the thing that actually
runs out at the end of the day and then
makes them stop working and eventually
runs out and makes them stop wanting to
work at the company
and uh and understand the value of
experience and the special superpowers
that come with it and then I will throw
in one more
um uh thing to share and maybe advice
for past self for God's sakes please be
nice to people the people around you are
trying really hard they're doing their
best to make the company successful just
like you if you're finding yourself
frustrated with someone if you can just
dig deeper and find a little bit more
empathy and Grace you probably won't
regret it I can say for myself I I never
once in nine years regretted assuming
good intent on the part of someone else
I was working with so just try to be
nice to people they're trying their best
just like you you won't work with that
foreign